\cleardoublepage
\chapter*{Acknowledgements}

\noindent This book would not have come into being without the contributions and
support of many other people.

I was first introduced to Python around 1997 by Dick Wall, while we
were working together on GIS software at ERDAS. I remember being
simultaneously happy that I had found a new tool language that was so
easy to use, and sad that the company did not let us use it for ``real
work.'' I have used Python extensively at all of my subsequent jobs,
and I have Dick to thank for the many happy hours I have spent working
on software since then.

The Python core development team has created a robust ecosystem of
language, tools, and libraries that continue to grow in popularity and
find new application areas. Without the continued investment in time
and resources they have given us, we would all still be spending our
energy reinventing wheel after wheel.

As described in the Introduction, the material in this book started
out as a series of blog posts. Without the exceptionally positive
response of all of the readers of the blog, those articles would never
have been updated to work with Python 3 and this new book would not
exist. Each of those posts has been reviewed and commented on by
members of the Python community, with corrections, suggestions, and
questions that lead to refinements and improvements that appear in
this book. Thank you all for reading along week after week, and
contributing your time and attention.

The technical reviewers for the book, Diana Clarke, Ian Cordasco, Mark
McClain, Paul McLanahan, and Ryan Petrello, spent many hours looking
for issues with the example code and accompanying explanations and the
result is stronger than I could have produced on my own. I also
received advice and feedback from Victor Stinner on the asyncio
module.

A special thanks goes to the editors, production staff, and marketing
team at Pearson for all of their hard work and assistance in helping
me realize my vision for this book and make it a success.

Finally, I want to thank my wife Theresa Flynn, who has gracefully
accepted all of the lost nights and weekends over the course of this
new project. Thank you for your advice, encouragement, and support.
